---
layout: post
title: "How Complex Systems Fail"
date: 2015-03-31 06:15:00 +0100
comments: true
categories:
---

This is the blog post of a talk I gave at the London Papers We Love Meetup a
couple of weeks ago. It's based upon a paper I like (love?) called “How Complex
Systems Fail” by Richard I Cook<sup>[1](#references)</sup>. The paper is formed
of 18 numbered points summarizing Cook's research on complex systems. It's a
great read, and you should take the time to give it a look.

Here I'm going to explore some of those ideas, using an example from one of the
most hazardous systems in the world, the American nuclear weapons program, from
a brilliant book I recently read called “Command and
Control”<sup>[2](#references)</sup>.

## Little Rock Air Base

Imagine yourself now transported to rural Arkansas, amidst mile after mile of
flat green countryside. Between two fields, a way away from anywhere, there is
a complex buried like this:

![Titan 2 Launch Complex]
({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/titan2bunker.jpg)

On the right, a Titan 2 missile is kept in its silo. The central structure is
the entrance from ground level, involving several blast locks, and on the left
is the command centre, always crewed and ready to launch the missile at a
moment’s notice.

At 6pm on September the 18th, 1980, two USAF airmen entered one such complex -
Launch Complex 374-7 - to perform routine maintenance on the missile. It
carried a 9 megaton warhead - equivalent to three times the total of all the
bombs dropped in World War 2, including the two atomic bombs. It would be
enough to wipe much of Arkansas off the map (and Arkansas is bigger than
England). It was aimed at somewhere in the USSR about 6000 miles away, and to
get there would use a pairing of fuel and oxidiser that ignite upon contact.
The missile in 374-7 and been recently been replaced on rotation, which meant
that as its oxidiser settled it required an occasional top-up of nitrogen to
maintain the right pressure.

The younger of the two airmen, there for on-the-job training, followed the
checklist steps as the team captain read them out over radio. He started to
unscrew the oxidiser tank’s pressure cap with a socket wrench, fumbled, and
dropped it. It fell 70 feet, hit the metal ring holding the base of the
missile, bounced, and pierced the missile's fuel tank. The missile chamber
rapidly filled with fuel vapour and the repairmen were forced to evacuate;
shortly thereafter they and the on-site crew had to evacuate the command centre
too. At their last reading of the controls a confusing mix of alarms were
active, and failsafe systems had failed to trigger. Once the command centre was
abandoned the air force was effectively blind and powerless as to what was
happening inside the Launch Complex. The biggest fear was that as the fuel
gushed out and left a low or negative pressure in its tank, the oxidiser tank
would break too, causing an instant explosion.

By 2am, after much deliberation between different levels of air force command,
a plan had eventually formed. A fresh pair of missile repairmen were sent to
get readings on the vapour levels. They broke open the outer security doors
with a crowbar, but failed to gain access to the missile chamber. Following
orders from a General, but in spite of the outcry of an experienced repairmen
on the radio, they turned on a venting fan as a secondary measure. It threw a
spark that ignited the cloud of fuel vapour, which created an explosion big
enough to blow the missile up through its 740 ton concrete silo door and
hundreds of metres into the air. The 9 megaton warhead separated, tumbled down,
and landed in a muddy ditch. Thankfully it did not explode. The bunker was left
looking like this:

![Titan 2 Launch Complex]
({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/titan2kaboom.jpg)

This is a great example of complex system failing - or if you’re optimistic,
only nearly failing, since the warhead did not explode.

With that story in mind, let’s have a look at the paper.



<a name="references"></a>

1. **How Complex Systems Fail** - Richard I Cook - [Free on web.mit.edu](http://web.mit.edu/2.75/resources/random/How%20Complex%20Systems%20Fail.pdf)
1. **Command and Control** - Eric Schlosser - [£7.99 on Amazon](http://www.amazon.co.uk/Command-Control-Eric-Schlosser/dp/0141037911/)
